is the US complicit in the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza and if so how much as
Israel continues its attacks on the
Strip the situation for its people is
described as catastrophic Washington
stands accused of turning a blind eye so
what can be done to stop this
catastrophe this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm SEL
vaner after more than two months of war
and Siege more chaotic scenes at the
Rafa Crossing as people fight to get
desperately needed humanitarian Aid
before the war 850 trucks of Aid entered
the strip every day through the Karam
Abu Salem Crossing with Israel and the
Rafa Crossing with Egypt now that ended
when Israel imposed a complete block on
October the 7th Israel has temporarily
reopened the route through Karam Abu
Salem for the first time to allow in
more humanitarian Aid and 24 trucks were
allowed through that was on Sunday but
that's far short of the huge needs of
the Palestinians should the United
States a staunch Ally of Israel be doing
more to help them and how complicit is
Washington in this humanitarian
catastrophe that's unfolding we'll
discuss all this in a moment first
though this report from Victoria gate
A desperate Scramble for food and water
at the Rafa Crossing Aid agencies say at
least half the people in Gaza are
starving and Rafa in the south is at the
epicenter of what the UN describes as an
apocalyptic humanitarian crisis we are
tittering on the edge of a possible
implosion because there is more and more
a breakdown of a civil order and as long
the humanitarian assistance remain a
crumble compared to the immensity of the
needs the more this tension will
continue the more the environment is
becoming
impossible Israel's war has taken an
unprecedented toll on gaza's entire
population the UN says 1.9 million
Palestinians that's more than 85% of its
people have been uprooted from their
homes more than a million have been
pushed to Rafa which is now the most
densely populated area in the strip food
is scarce and there's no sanitation the
UN says around 2.2 million people need
food Aid to
survive there's been no flour for 3 or 4
days there's no water no rice we're
suffering there's nothing living
conditions are 0% even minus
zero I've come every day since Wednesday
and returned empty-handed I spent the
night outside the gate while the area
was being bombed
it's very difficult to endure this
suffering I'm not able to buy food for
my
children Israel allowed a limited amount
of Aid through the kuram Abu Salem
Crossing on Sunday that's the first time
since the start of the war on Gaza but
as Israel's Army continues to bombard
the strip un officials are warning The
Limited delivery of desperately needed
humanitarian Aid could lead to a
breakdown in civil
order Victoria gon B for Inside Story
[Music]
time to bring in our guests from
Washington DC is Robert Hunter former US
ambassador to Nato from Arlington
Virginia is halel gindy senior fellow at
the Middle East Institute and director
of Palestine and Israeli Palestinian
Affairs at The Institute also from
Washington DC is Zena ashrawi Hutcherson
director of development and expansion at
the American Arab anti-discrimination
committee you're an activist thank you
all for joining us Robert first question
question to you since the US is Israel's
single biggest backer diplomatically
politically militarily economically how
much of this humanitarian disaster and
we've just seen those those that footage
of people fighting to get that food at
the RAF of border crossing how much of
this humanitarian disaster is the US
actually responsible
for well I think everybody here
sympathized empathized with Israel on
October the 7th when Hamas attacked
killed about, 1200 people and took 240
hostages uh but that was now two months
ago uh since then with the major Israeli
Onslaught on Gaza which has killed I
guess in excess of 20,000 people now and
maybe 50,000 uh wounded and a
displacement of 85 90% maybe even more
of people in Gaza attention around the
world and attention here certainly on
the media has shifted to the disaster
the catastrophe I think is the word you
used uh for the Palestinian people and
there really is only one thing that can
be done right now is the president of
the United States has to tell the prime
minister of Israel to stop the bombing
to stop the war and do it right now CU
every day it goes on it's not only worse
for the people there it's becoming worse
for the president of the United States
and his
administration you're not you're not
completely answering my question Robert
I I take all your points but the
question is how much is the you how much
can the US be blamed for this since the
US is providing diplomatic cover for
Israel military assistance and economic
help well how much can the United States
be blamed uh Israel is actually doing uh
uh the the fighting and and the killing
of the civilians as well as I guess some
people from Hamas but the United States
is Israel's only Patriot Patron uh the
bombs most of the bombs were supplied by
the United States some of them are
Hightech weapons some of them what they
call dumb bombs uh we are actively
engaged in this fight because without
United States support Israel wouldn't be
able to carry it on and we're we're
Israel's only uh only friend in the
world everybody in the world knows uh
the the war would stop if the United
States said to Israel it has to
stop so do I infer from that that you
blame the us at least in part for this
or not
quite well I I I think assessing blame
is quite useless I'm trying to make the
point that if the United States said uh
uh stop it it would have to stop if you
want to call that blame I I'll let you
do it but it's certainly agency and it's
certainly engagement and it's certainly
responsibility of the United States now
uh to to get Israel to
stop holl it over to you you titled your
recent book blind spot America and the
Palestinians from balfor to Trump is the
Palestinian suffering a blind spot in US
foreign policy circles or in US decision
making I I think there's no question
that it is um the United States U us
officials have historically had multiple
blind spots uh most often to Palestinian
political aspirations and rights um but
now we're seeing a very pronounced blind
spot with regard to Palestinian Humanity
um it's it's uh I think it's clear that
the United States is uh Bears enormous
responsibility and frankly is complicit
in the humanitarian catastrophe
unfolding in Gaza um the United States
has supported uh Israel at every stage
of this war um there are many things the
United States could have done that it
did not do it could have laid out red
lines uh very early on with regard to
civilians it could have said um it's not
acceptable to weaponize starvation and
disease
uh in in uh directed at an entire
civilian population we know that Israel
is deliberately
causing a uh humanitarian catastrophe
and that is part of its strategy um and
instead of of laying out clear red lines
up front um the United States and
frankly all of Western Europe um
primarily um most of Western Europe um
have also acquiesced in this in this
catastrophe no one spoke out uh to say
it is not acceptable to use food and
water and medicine as a weapon of War um
and so uh the United States Bears um
enormous uh responsibility and is
frankly finding it very difficult having
offered no red lines and a and a bright
green light the United States has
now kind of painted itself into a corner
where they can't uh reign in the uh the
the the the military machine um the the
death and destruction um that is being
inflicted on Gaza khed you mentioned
starvation um in fact just today just a
few hours ago uh Human Rights Watch
published a report called starvation as
a weapon of War starvation used as a
weapon of war in Gaz is the exact title
of the report I'll quote from it Human
Rights Watch writes the Israeli
government government is using
starvation of civilians as a method of
warfare in the occupied Gaza Strip which
is a war crime Israeli forces or
deliberately blocking the delivery of
water food and fuel apparently raising
agricultural areas depriving the
civilian population of objects
indispensable to their survival um Zena
Zena Shi Hutcherson I want to bring you
into this conversation
so the the question that I was asking
Robert at the top of the show is how
much the US can be blamed for it I
understand Robert's point that you know
he he doesn't see value in assigning
blame but that so many of our viewers
are asking this very same question if
you have one party to the conflict that
is not directly involved but that is
allowing the other to carry out the war
and the result of the war is starvation
and a humanitarian crisis how much do
you blame that supporting party and
that's you know that's the central
question that we're asking
today um I mean I think it's there I
mean complicity is simplistic even the
US has been directly involved in this
genocide uh since it's since the very
beginning with generals on the ground
with uh sending weapons and bombs and
and financial aid of course and
diplomatic cover and support
continuously we also can't forget that
we talk about Gaza uh and the Gaza Strip
right now in terms of genocide but
before this genocide started Gaza was in
a really precarious position uh there
was food insecurity they didn't have
clean water to drink there was no
sanitation you know U um infrastructure
present so before this genocide started
Gaza was in a precarious position and
now it's beyond comprehension to be
quite honest and the US has known about
this has been complicit and directly
involved in this genocide uh from day
one and enabled it to continue with its
silence as well as uh uh financial and
diplomatic support but I also want to
emphasize that in order for them to for
the us to continue this support for
Israel they need to have local support
for for the genocide so for decades and
it's sort of encapsulated in in in the
Gaza Strip right now but for decades the
United States has given cover for Israel
to do whatever Israel wants to do
Financial diplomatic um federally with
resolutions and bills which we've seen
now since the start of the of the
genocide in the Gaza Strip uh a record
number of bills have have gone through
the the um federally through Congress uh
conflicting anti ISM with the criticism
of Israel Etc um there's also us
organizations backing billions funding
illegal settlements I mean we can go on
about this there's APAC involvement
there's ADL so I mean the involvement of
of of the United States in the genocide
on Gaza but also in the ethnic cleansing
and the SE colonialism that Palestine
has been experiencing is direct and
long-term a few more data points uh to
submit to all of you that are taken from
this Human Rights Watch report on
starvation used as a weapon of war in
Gaza on November 15th the last
operational wheat Mill uh in the Gaza
Strip was bombed by Israel uh November
28th we had a report that more than a
third of agricultural land in Northern
in the northern Gaza Strip had been
damaged or destroyed this comes from the
Palestine food security sector the world
food program says that there's serious
risk of starvation in Gaza uh on
December 6th the only water desalination
plant in Northern Gaza was stopped being
functional and on on and on and goes and
you know the broader picture that this
paints is that becomes very difficult at
this stage and that's a massive
understatement to eat to drink and to do
all those things that just on a very
very basic level keep people alive
Robert I'll I'll come back to you with
this idea of values one of the things
one of the pillars of America's power in
the world is that it claims to uphold
values and to be a more ethical power
than other countries right than some of
its Rivals when the US ties itself to
something like this where people just
can't eat enough and there's a very
simple answer by the way very simple
solution to this allowing more
humanitarian Aid enough Aid so that
people can eat and drink at a bare
minimum when the US ties itself to
something like this what does it do to
its power around the
world this is one of the biggest
concerns I think the United States has
or at least Administration should have
in terms of overall American standing in
the world at the moment the US
reputation for caring deeply about
humanitarian issues is being shredded by
what Netanyahu and his government and
Israel and general are doing uh the
United States is complicit uh the war
could not continue without the United
States uh the United States could demand
instantly uh humanitarian supplies and
the United States could instantly tell
Mr Netanyahu that the war has to stop
the president of the United States uh
could tell Mr Netanyahu that is what has
to happen and I don't think even a
Netanyahu could afford to ignore what
the United States wants to do but we the
Americans are paying a very heavy price
for what is being done in this war and
uh it's going to be difficult for us to
go back anywhere else in the world and
talk about how other countries behave uh
whether it's in Burma or in China or in
Central African Republic uh the United
States no longer at the moment has any
credibility as humanitarian
country following up on what you just
said why isn't the US president picking
up his phone giving the Israeli Prime
Minister a call and saying now this has
to change and we are going to have to
allow in more Aid water and other basic
necessities into the Gaza
Strip well it's not just that it's to
stop the bombing uh to which which makes
it worse you can have all the
humanitarian Aid you want but if you
continue to slaughter people uh that's
not going to help the the dead people uh
why is the president doing it one
because he has a lifelong attachment uh
particularly in his generation to the
security and prosperity and future of
the state of of Israel but also he has
political calculations we are now what
11 months before the next presidential
election uh he has to think about a
major part of his constituency so in
some ways and this is what as an
American within our politics troubles me
very deeply uh it appears that the
president is looking to his political
base uh let's call it for what it is
it's called the is Israel Lobby and not
wanting to offend the lobby by coming
out and saying I'm sorry for the good of
the United States and yes the long-term
good of Israel as well as Palestinians
this must stop now and frankly if the
president made that clear to Mr
Netanyahu he would be taking a huge risk
for his country if he did not comply
Haled El gindi and Zena I want to hear
you on on on this issue of us Politics
as well and and re-election chances if
um you take a stronger approach to
Israel but how you first on this do you
subscribe to this notion that you do not
get reelected as US president
specifically that Biden would not get
reelected as US president if at this
juncture he were to be harder on
Israel I mean that's been the
conventional wisdom for uh for many many
years uh the the irony is that today the
the political landscape is quite
different and and it looks um like the
reverse may may even be true that this
might be you know the the the
administration's handling of this issue
has been criticized um and and is
opposed by large segments of the
American population well beyond the Arab
and Muslim communities um or
progressives um but but particularly his
uh base uh young people uh people of
color certainly uh the Arab and Muslim
communities in in in the United States
are quite angry at his um at his uh
apparent indifference to Palestinian
suffering and and his entire handling of
this war so um we've seen polls uh show
that he's actually lost considerable
support um as a result of this and so
this might actually be the first time a
an American president loses an election
because of their support for Israel as
opposed to the opposite um uh but uh you
know we I'm I'm not entirely convinced
that that the president is acting purely
or even primarily uh with regard to
domestic politics I think he is a True
Believer I think he is passionate about
his support for Israel um and he is it
is partly generational but it's also
uniquely Joe Biden uh other presidents
who've also been quite uh unshakable in
their support for Israel have at least
been able to see the bigger picture from
a human standpoint from a strategic
standpoint um the uh the the person of
Joe Biden seems to be completely blinded
of even to the realities of how this is
going to harm us interests uh as well as
Israeli security going forward I mean
there's no there's no um it's impossible
to imagine that in Israel inflicting
this level of human and material
destruction on Gaza is somehow going to
bring security or stability to anyone I
think anyone uh with some basic Common
Sense never mind empathy can can
understand that and so we're talking
about a a a a serious blindness um a
serious kind of emotional attachment
that has blinded him even to the damage
he's doing to American interests and and
that is I think very uh very much a part
of the the person of Joe Biden rather
than simply a political or geopolitical
set of calculations okay that's really
interesting I want to come back to part
of this but first Zena I had you waiting
in the wings there about this this us
domestic politics question you tweeted
not that long ago election season is
about to go in overdrive and
Palestinians will pay the price of two
failed leadership so you do seem to
believe that this is going to be
dictated how the US behaves on this
issue is going to be dictated at least
in part by us domestic political
considerations how do you think that
shapes what we're going to
see so I mean just to go back a little
bit while many supported Biden
begrudgingly under false pretense and
and with the intimidation of the vote
for lesser of two evils in 2020 if you
will um there's no longer a viable
option for many and um there simply is
no worse than genocide you know uh so
for decades the Palestinian American
Arab American Muslim American vote has
been taken for granted particularly by
the Democratic party and you know the
party that boasts inclusion diversity
human rights uh the umbrella um using a
system of tokenization intimidation and
mostly political decorative lip service
uh we we've heard the talk many times we
are starting to see people accuse and
label protest a protest vote as a vote
against democracy like a protest vote
against uh Biden if people don't vote or
um so accusations leveled against those
demanding an anti genocide um that two
months later uh remain unheeded and I
want to make it very clear that the
intimidation tactics and blame that have
been used for decades this is not recent
for decades on disenfranchised voters
that if we don't vote for Biden or the
Democratic party it's a vote against
democracy it's not just an antithesis of
democracy but it also strategically
absolves the Biden Administration in
this case and the Democratic Party from
accountability on the direct involvement
as we were discussing earlier in
genocide and distracts again from the
failed leadership of the political Elite
um I mean imagine imagine the
Palestinian Americans and Arab Americans
and Muslim Americans and allies being
chastised for refusing to support the
killing of your own family members or
imagine being shamed for refusing to be
complicit in the Eraser of your own
people uh imagine being blamed for the
failure of democracy simply for
participating in it if our votes are
challenging A system that has
historically been reliant on
marginalizing manipulating bullying and
targeting minorities as an un as
undemocratic then again this isn't a
democracy um many in leadership have
long perfected deflection and blame as
we know and projecting their own
political shortcomings on those who are
less capable and or less equip less
equipped um to defend or protect
themselves and this is also by Design so
um a potential Biden Harris loss can
only be blamed on Biden Harris and their
Administration and the Democratic party
any other claim is disingenuous to be
quite Frank and and sorry to take up too
much time but let me be very clear here
I'm not saying not to vote or don't vote
in fact I hope Palestinian American Arab
American Muslim Americans and allies uh
in our community register family and
friends to vote go out and and educate
people on what it means to vote and what
your voice means and matters z z here's
the here's the thing and sorry to
interrupt and jump in but here's the
thing about about about when you go to
the polling station you know on uh when
it's when it's election day in the US
presidential election it's a little less
than uh it's about 11 months away now
just under 11 months away is that voters
will likely at this stage it's not a
guarantee but likely have the choice
between Biden and Trump so anybody who
wants to punish Biden on account of the
way he handled this war would
potentially be voting for Trump you know
uh and I'm not sure if your moral
compass says I wanted more support for
Palestinians and therefore I'm not
voting for Biden I'm not sure that same
moral compass then leads you to a vote
for
Trump yes but nobody first of all it's
this is what democracy is when you have
a two-party system you have to vote for
one or the other and in this Cas are you
saying they should vote for Trump then
are you saying that people who support
the Palestinian cause should vote for
Trump in November
2024 absolutely not I'm actually not
advocating for a votee for Trump or
Republicans at all in fact I disagree
with almost all of their policies um
what I am saying uh is showing up to
vote and writing in a name or simply
voting for down ballot candidates based
on policy is accountability for genocide
and for 75 years 75 plus years of total
impunity that the US has afforded Israel
at the expense of the Palestinian people
and the morality of our just cause so
accountability is uncomfortable but it
pales in the face of genocide and the
ethnic cleansing of uh that's happening
right now in Palestine the Democratic
party win or lose needs to have some
serious soul searching after this many
already felt that they don't belong in
the party but we're we merely tokenized
and and being part of the party because
they don't have anywhere else to go now
it's time to act on it and this is not
exclusive to the Arab Palestinian Muslim
um communities either if I may so Robert
we have about three minutes left a
little under three minutes in the show
at this point um there's a question we
asked at the very top of the show and I
recognize it's a little bit more
aspirational but we said what can be
done to stop this humanitarian
catastrophe you've been a practitioner
right of diplomacy at at the highest
level you were NATO Ambassador what
would be your answer to that
question well the president of United
States needs to tell the prime minister
of Israel this has to stop and be
willing to back it up uh with
immediately stopping a supply of arm
he's not so far that's the whole point
stop stopping the economic support uh do
what President Eisenhower did in 19 56
and just said we love Israel we love the
relationship but if you don't stop this
now they're going to be very serious
consequences for you and he's got to
show it and he's got to make it happen
instead of sending people out there as
he did this last week is going to this
week and say well we're really for you
but please pretty please don't be so
beastly to the Palestinians that is not
only stupid it's crass and it's
immoral all right that's all the time we
have for today but thank you so much to
everybody for coming I want to thank our
guests Robert Hunter halel gindy zra
Hutchinson and thank you to for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website that's al.com of
course and for further discussion go to
our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle
there is at AJ insidestory from me serl
vaner and the whole team here in Doha
bye for
now